---
status: {proposed}
date: {2023-04-14}
---

# Logging guidelines

## Logging

{Describe the context and problem statement, e.g., in free form using two to three sentences or in the form of an illustrative story. You may want to articulate the problem in form of a question and add links to collaboration boards or issue management systems.}

Logging is an opinionated problem, and at the moment of this writing there is not really a clear guidelines on how to do it in a consistent way. This ADR aims to address this problem and give some guidelines on the coding style or thoughts that we should do when we need to log. This is still not a strict enforcement but yet a guide.

## Decision Drivers

* At the moment the default level is too silent. Debugging or check if something is wrong is really hard without increasing the verbosity.
* There is no clear understand of what the `TRACE_LEVEL` should be, and we should set. We usually just put this to an "high" value and log everything.
* Logging from the Epinio CLI is confusing because the output is mixed with the CLI output

## Considered Options

* Changing the logger with a semantic one
* Outlining some guidelines to use better the current logger
* Changing the logging output of the CLI

## Decision Outcome

Chosen option 2 (__"Outlining some guidelines to use better the current logger"__) and 3 (__"Add an optional `--log-file` the logging output of the CLI"__).

Option 1 (__"Changing the logger with a semantic one"__) it will be easier to understand when log as `INFO`, `DEBUG` or `TRACE` but this will lead to a huge refactor without really a huge improvement (we could even use consts to map this values to integers). We will still need some guidelines to properly log.

The option 2 will probably lead to a __Coding Standard__ document, still with no a strict enforcement, but with some ideas and gotchas that will be useful for outcomers and as a reference for reviewing and developing.

## Pros and Cons of the Options

### Changing the logger with a semantic one

At the moment we are using the `logr.Logger` interface to log (https://github.com/go-logr/logr). This interface provides you some simple functions to easily log, but it uses integers to increase the verbosity (`logger.V(2).Info("message")`).

A semantic logger will use instead a well defined set of words to increase or decrease the severity of the message (i.e. `DEBUG`, `INFO`, `WARN`, ...).

#### Pros

* Semantic logging is a well known standard, with a clear interface
* Easy to decide which level to use

#### Cons

* The refactor of changing the logger using a new interface or implementation is huge

### Outlining some guidelines to use better the current logger

Keep the current logger and defining some guidelines is an easy way to increase the logging quality without too much effort. Some guidelines will be useful in any case to understand how to decide the best verbosity level to use in which case.

#### Pros

* Easy to implement

#### Cons

* ?

### Add an optional `--log-file` the logging output of the CLI

The CLI is using the same logger, and when the logging is enabled with an high `TRACE_LEVEL` the actual output will be mixed with the CLI output. This is a bit difficult to read. The proposal to improve this is to add a `--log-file` flag where to redirect the logging output, without the need of trying to understand what is a log output and what is a STDOUT message.

#### Pros

* Logs will be easy to read and store
* Users will be able to send logs of what they did easily

#### Cons

* Probably a bit of refactoring needed

## More Information

- Our logger interface: https://github.com/go-logr/logr
- (opinionated) blog post by Dave Cheney: https://dave.cheney.net/2015/11/05/lets-talk-about-logging
- New standard logging from stdlib:
  - https://pkg.go.dev/golang.org/x/exp/slog
  - https://github.com/golang/go/issues/56345
